AI Moderation Feature for Zulip
Aadarsh LN (al9581), Nitish KS (nk4277), Purvansh Arora (pa2757), Rishabh Narayan (rn2718)

Introduction
This document proposes a feature for moderating chats on the open-source
communication platform, Zulip, which lacks automated content moderation. The
intended users in this specific use-case will be students, with a user base of 300 users.
Our main motivation for designing this feature is to strive for a safer environment for
chatting on Zulip. The current platform is painful from an administrative perspective
due to the nature of moderation being manual. This can be labor-intensive and
error-prone due to the load of censoring content with the thought of multiple students
and their backgrounds in mind. In an ideal situation, the system should be able to detect
any chat propagating hate offenses or self-harm and hide it. Based on the strikes against
the user, the offensive user would be banned from the usergroup. The moderator would
be responsible for reviewing the user based on the alerts provided by the system. The
role of the system admin would be to label messages when the system fails in real time.
Additionally, users can report messages if they do not get flagged by the system, and
this can be used to re-label and re-train the model.
Training - Aadarsh LN
In order to flag the chat messages as inappropriate or not, we are leveraging the
hateBERT model, which is available on HuggingFace. It was trained on the English BERT
base uncased model with more than 1 million posts from banned communities in
Reddit. The model is composed of 0.1B parameters, its precision is FP-32. In order to
make the model more robust to this use case, we will be retraining it with the dataset
associated with the Jigsaw-Toxic-Comment-Classification-Challenge and a self-harm
dataset, which was built using Reddit. The input that will be passed to the model would
be pre-processed text data. The output consists of two probability scores on a
continuous range from 0 to 1, where 0 represents a negative class (safe) and 1 represents
a positive class (detected offensive or self-harm content).
Serving - Purvansh Arora
The model serving will be handled by FastAPI to handle async inference requests, which
will be integrated via Zulip’s web hooks. We are aiming for a <200 ms P99 latency
execution to ensure the chat functionality remains seamless. The system should be able
to sustain a peak throughput of 15-20 requests per second (assuming a peak
concurrency of ~100 active users during active hours). The service will translate raw
probabilities to a tiered decision matrix. The proposed matrix is: a message with high
offensive confidence (>0.85) will be hidden, record a strike against the user, and will be

routed to the admin. Messages with medium offensive confidence (0.60-0.85) will
trigger a warning to the user and flag the message for admin moderation before a strike
is applied. A message with even a low-medium self-harm confidence (>0.30) will
immediately escalate the message to the admin, send mental health resources to the
concerned user, and not remove the message, as that risks isolation of the concerned
individual. A manual user-reporting mechanism can serve as a fail-safe for edge cases
and false negatives.
Data - Rishabh Narayan
Data :
●​ Arrival: Intercepts raw user messages at the exact moment of submission.
●​ Real-time Processing: Cleans the text by removing markdown, standardizing
emojis, scrubbing PII, and extracting URLs.
●​ Inference: Probability scores for the cleaned text.
●​ Routing: Applies moderation if the score is high, queues for admin review if the
score is medium, or allows the message to keep displaying if the score is low.
●​ Training Processing: Asynchronously collects human admin decisions and
messages reported by the users to use as retraining datasets.
Training Data Details:
●​ Candidate Window: Pulls data exclusively from a recent one-week period.
●​ Privacy: Use out-of-the-box LLM to scrub personal data.
●​ Noise Reduction: Filters out bot notifications, spam, and unresolved admin logs.
●​ Leakage Prevention: Strips all metadata generated after the message was sent to
ensure the model only learns from the original text.
DevOps - Nitish KS
As part of DevOps, we automate deployments (on Chameleon Cloud), configurations, and
model training by leveraging Infrastructure as Code (IaC), and CI/CD pipelines.
Model Freshness Triggers: Model retraining is triggered by 200 new verified flags or a
weekly fallback schedule.
Typical Load: The system is scoped for 300 total users, with typical steady-state usage
of 30–40 concurrent students.
Peak Load: Peak usage is ~100 online students, generating a maximum load of ~15
messages/sec.
Deployment & State: A single VM (4 vCPU/16GB RAM) runs the Zulip app, database, and
ML inference API in isolated containers. Model retraining dynamically provisions,
completes the training run, saves the model artifacts, and destroys a temporary VM via
the CI/CD pipeline.

